Arbiter of manners and morals for the community.
And what was her official capacity?
Well, Fred Smith, he was well known among his former students.
They were the kind of faculty that would have students over.
And they would, of course, then once those students went on to become millionaires and zillionaires, they'd always come back and see Fred and Odette.
And this was the way that worked.
The oil patch has gone through many, many ups and downs, bangs and busts, as we say.
It's interesting, the people who do remain friends.
Now, getting back to Odette Smith, I should continue here.
The biggest put down I ever had when I came here was from Odette.
She was something else.
She was introducing me, I think it was when I first met her, and I told her I was from St. Paul, Minnesota, and she said,
you're not a damn Yankee, you're just a Northerner."
She said it with that Mississippi accent and I just wanted to crawl into the woodwork someplace.
But anyway, she really did.
If she didn't like somebody, boy, I mean, they'd better be careful.
All right, other friends that y'all made?
Well, of course, in the department there were, and Bob is still, and Tony Ganji in geophysics, they're still very close friends.
And of course, I have made friends in recent years since I've been retired, I've made friends in the community.
And I know your wife, Jo, is
I'm glad to have her as a member in the Women's Club because you meet a whole lot of people that you would never get to meet.
I really enjoyed being a member of the Women's Club.
But that was after?
That was after I retired.
I think I was still working part-time when I got to, when I was asked to belong to the Women's Club.
But I have really enjoyed it because as I said, people that I wouldn't get to meet because I would meet all faculty and I wouldn't meet, and I wouldn't meet
you know people in the community and of course that's a whole other history in itself.
Did y'all get involved in any community activities?
No, we really didn't.
Boy Scouts Church?
No, I belonged to, it was a long time before I joined a church.
I joined St. Thomas Episcopal Church and enjoy that very much.
I was born and bred a Presbyterian
And of course, the old saw goes, you're a Presbyterian born and bred, you're a Presbyterian until you're dead.
But this somehow, and I sometimes think some of this ritual in the Episcopal Church gets a little bit beyond me, and I think of it as I don't think so.
But anyway, I really enjoy that church, and it's very congenial.
A lot of young people and it's a lot of, it's a very enjoyable experience.
Alright, describe the shopping for a new Brian and I.
Good heavens, good heavens.
Where did you buy groceries and clothing?
There was something called Orr's and then it became Piggly Orr's and as far as I know until Safeway came in here, I don't think there was anything.
And we just had, we did what we could.
I think that there was a,
There was a meat, a store where they had, Reed Fields didn't exist back then.
But there was a mom and pop grocery downtown.
I didn't get that far.
I did all my shopping at Orr's because it wasn't far away.
Where did you shop for clothing and other things?
Oh, I guess we always went to Houston then.
Okay.
Yeah, right.
And where did y'all, if you were going to go out to eat, a special meal where?
What was the place that you got catfish on University Drive?
I'm trying to remember what the name of that was.
I can't remember it.
But it was in a, everybody went there.
If you were going to have catfish, they went there.
But I don't remember any other, really, there wasn't any place for a very long time.
Then we had a McDonald's and my children celebrated with it when that McDonald's came in.
So we had quite a few McDonald's for a while for a quick meal.
What were your early opinions about the community in terms of law and order and safety and so forth?
Well, we've had some bad experiences but this wasn't just when we first came here.
We've had two break-ins.
Really?
Yeah.
One was when Bob was out of town and I was working.
And I came home after 10 at night, one of my working night.
And I thought the door was a little bit ajar.
And I came in the house, and it was shambles.
Well, I didn't know whether I should be in the house or not, but I called the police.
And then I thought, well, I'd better close the door, because I left the door open.
Well, what had happened, they took the door off the hinges.
So when I went to close the door, it came out, and there was this crash.
And I almost fainted.
Bob had a very valuable greener shotgun that some patient had given my grandfather.
My grandfather was a doctor.
He had a very valuable gun, but they also took the greener and one of the old shotguns.
Whatever it was, it wasn't valuable.
And then they got a little bit of jewelry.
Now the other break-in I had was sometime, it probably was somebody who was working in the house or doing something.
They took all my flat silver that was in a case that was in a fake drawer underneath the chest that I had it in.
I came to have a dinner party.
I took out the chest and it was empty.
And I don't know when that was taken.
I have no idea.
But those are the times that we had.
And of course, in the early days, nobody locked their doors.
We didn't lock our doors here.
And of course, we wouldn't think of not doing it anymore.
But I think my friends tell me that as you get toward downtown Bryan,
It's very, they're having a very serious problem with people who live in that older neighborhood down there.
All right, in those early months and years, was it difficult for a newcomer to be accepted?
Well, I suppose everybody, you know, people still talk about O'Brien and that O'Brien still exists.
The heirs of those people are still here and they are, some of them,
Not all, but being in the Women's Club, I know who they are.
Some of them are very nice and very gracious.
Others of them are still impressed with being O'Brien.
So, you know, just like any organization.
But for you and your husband?
Yeah, well, we were certainly accepted here, you know.
All right, back on the campus.
The search that led to Irene Hoadley came, when was that, in the 70s?
It was in the 70s.
It must have been early 70s because Jack Smith was here in 1969 when our son died.
And I have thought afterwards that I could never have survived
here if Jack Smith hadn't been here and been so considerate and all of that.
Because he was just one of those wonderful, thoughtful, now maybe he couldn't have coped with the university growth and all that, but at least he would have made an effort and would have been loved and respected always by our library staff.
And we were all very sad when he left.
Now, in terms of Irene Hoadley, I think she missed her calling.
She should have been a plant manager someplace.
Describe, as you recall, the search process.
The search process,
There were several, their final candidates.
One was a black candidate from, was it Tennessee or someplace, and Irene Hoadley.
And then I don't know who the other candidate was.
I think there were three.
There usually are three in this kind of thing.
Very early on.
we got the feeling that she had everybody pegged, you know, what they were capable of, what they were doing.
She...
But back on the search.
Back on the search.
Do you remember who the, was there a favorite among the library staff of those finalists?
I don't know that.
I can't say.
My friend, my good black friend, Helen Britton, whom I talked to the other day, she may have thought that Irene, she had known Irene before.
She may have been, she was on the search committee, as I remember.
But I don't remember who else was on the search committee.
So she knew a whole lot.
All right, let me add to the student typist, add this as an editorial note.
I was the chairman of that search committee as dean of faculties.
And when made the final report to Vice President Calhoun,
I and others on the committee thought that the black finalist was probably the best person in terms of experience and capability and so forth.
He had been the number two man at the University of Houston, and wherever he was at that point, he was doing very, very well, and we found nothing but very positive things.
Dr. Calhoun thought that it would be appropriate for us to hire a woman in what was then the first significant leadership position here on the campus.
And so he said, let's hire her.
The black finalist was hired a year later, I believe, at either Dartmouth or Brown as the director of libraries.
So he certainly demonstrated that he had the capability.
End of note.
Do you remember her first, when she first arrived, her first impressions and so forth?
Well, I guess the closest thing, it's a slang expression, cool cat would come to mind.
Cool cat.
This is the time that you remember that computers were coming in big time.
She wanted to have all of that, but
She did not provide for the maintenance, the money for the maintenance.
She did not add, she did not factor that in to her management structure at all.
She just wanted to have state of the arts, in quotes.
That's fine.
But you, within those days, and it's even true now, if you don't have, you don't have the maintenance for this, if you don't have the software
updates for this, you're not going to get very far.
I can remember years that we had the dumb terminals sitting out over in the computer center.
No money to repair them.
Now the faculty and the students were all screaming bloody murder.
But it had not been factored in.
Now that would not happen in this day and age, of course.
But any library director will have to always factor in a huge amount for your updates, all your software and your hardware, because the hardware will wear out.
When she first arrived, who were the key members of her staff after she?
Well, I think that Evelyn King, Dr. King was her head of public services.
And let's see, who was, I don't think she was yet.
I think that maybe Henry Osmeyer was head of public services.
I'm trying to remember.
That's a little hazy back then.
But one of them.
Anyway, and I don't know who was head of technical services back at that point in time.
Did you professionals have regular meetings with her?
Only once a year for our annual evaluation.
There wasn't a staff meeting of the key?
The staff, well, yes, she would.
But she was a great one for keeping the pot always boiling, having whatever these management techniques are, whether that's deeds assessment or
management by objectives or participative management, whatever those things are, somewhere the buck has to stop.
And she always took care of it that the buck would stop with somebody else.
Well, that eventually did catch up with her in later years, but she got by with it for a long time.
All right, now, in terms of the higher administration, when you first got here, Earl Rudder was the president.
Yes.
Did you?
But I did not know President Rudder.
And I remember, this is a little off.
I'll sort of digress.
I knew what it was really like is when it was Earl Rudder's funeral, and they had that memorial.
over at G. Raleigh, and lo and behold, there was Lyndon Johnson and John Connolly, and they were in their academic robes, but they were coming from two sides, and when they got together,
they put their arms around her and I said, now I know what this is all about.
Finally, I figured it out.
But it was, it was, I'll never forget that as long as I live.
Did you and your colleagues have any perception of whether or not he was concerned about the library?
Did you all see him?
No.
Oh, heavens no.
You know, that was far beyond our, our, what we were thinking of at that point in time.
Did you, in those early years, did you and your colleagues ever have any special requests from some board member or politician or notable former student?
Not that I can remember.
Nobody came over and demanded something?
Nobody came over and demanded something immediately.
Well, if they had, it wouldn't be on our level.
We'd have to ask someone else to take care of this.
And there were no notable library physical problems of a fire, tornado?
Well we all, well we had, there was always some leakage in this building.
I'm sure that they have since remedied all of that.
But there were some serious leakage.
If we'd have heavy storms, the stacks could get.
It was just a big leak.
I can't remember.
It was over by, close by, where documents came in to where we came into this building from Cushing.
And during those early years, your place of duty.
My place of duty, I was first, I was
as I said, when I first came, I was in the old Cushing.
When we moved over here, Dr. Jackson was head of, Kathy Jackson, who is still here, was head of sciences and technology.
This is divisional reference.
I was, I think Henry Alsmeyer was head for a little while of social sciences, and then I became the head, and that's when I think he became assistant director.
There came a time
I can't even remember what his exact role, but because he and Evelyn overlapped in some way, and I can't tell you what that overlap was.
But we were fortunate to have Evelyn King as a buffer.
When you first went to work, your place of duty was in the big second floor reference room?
Yeah, we were in centralized reference over there.
And then we moved to the science intake.
Well, I think that...
They had wanted the first floor of this building to be an undergraduate collection.
Then on second floor, it was documents, government documents.
And it isn't as it is now.
And it's spread between social sciences and sciences.
Now that's what the documents people are.
But at that time, it was all one division.
Third floor, we were on third floor with social sciences and humanities, and on fourth floor there was science and technology.
When you first became an administrator, describe your responsibilities.
Well, mostly to keep the show running.
That was in the early days when you had to do the staffing, and the staffing was pretty meager.
classified staff was doing just every bit as much as the other staff.
As the professionals?
Yes, as the professionals.
And where did you recruit the professionals?
Where did they prepare?
Where did they train?
Well, they trained, actually training is just sort of like throwing them in the lion pit is what, because we didn't have time to do in-depth training like they do now.
Did they have library degrees though?
Yeah, not with the classified staff, of course, but the professionals that came in, who came in.
One of the early ones was the young man, Charles, who was head of the friends group here.
Schultz?
Natch, no.
He's head of the Evans friends has been Charles.
I can't remember his name.
Well, anyway, somebody who came in later was Charles Gilreath, and he started working for me in social sciences, and he was the one
who started the first online service that we had.
He developed that.
That was his baby.
And there was very primitive days.
There were very primitive demos for onlines.
We used to, even when, for many years, we were just jerry-rigging all of our equipment, plugs, cords, moving it around.
Now, of course, they have these lovely rooms where every student can have a computer.
Everybody learns everything that they can do online.
This is more like a different world.
Do you remember any anecdotes from the early computer days, either amusing or serious?
Not really.
But you would have frequent power outages because there was just too much electronics loaded in our part of the
Well, our part, our library is what I'm trying to say.
Not just any one unit.
There was just too much loaded.
And of course, that has all been taken care of.
And I don't doubt if you have any power outages.
But when I hear about the people in California having power outages, you know that.
And then you'd have to be very careful about power surges as it came back on because that would wipe out all your material.
So, you know, it's a different world out here.
When you became an administrator.
Well, way back when.
What advice and counsel did you try to give to new staff members?
What did I try to do?
I don't remember that I gave any words of advice because, very honestly, I was a much better Indian than I was a chief.
I probably was too kind-hearted to be a serious administrator.
And I could do it.
And the last couple of years, I was working.
maybe within the last four to six years, I was acting head of documents.
And the documents I knew very little.
I learned a lot.
And I'm sorry, that's one of the regrets that I have, is that I didn't learn the documents earlier.
Instead of just trying to react to them, I should have proacted.
That terminology isn't very good.
But that's about what I should have been in there, because I found it fascinating and I really enjoyed it.
But then, of course, there were always staff problems.
Wherever you went, there were going to be staff problems.
That's the name of the game.
In the 60s and 70s, were we paying competitive salaries?
Not then.
You did later.
You did later, but you didn't during that time.
Mr. Runner died, and you mentioned the memorial service.
Then a few months later, Jack Williams is hired.
Do you remember any impressions of him?
early on?
Did you all see him ever?
I don't know.
We didn't see him.
I don't remember ever seeing President Rutter in the library.
We could have seen, I don't know, I'm not sure that we ever did see Jack Williams unless he was coming over to give a speech or something.
I don't know that.
What about, and then Calhoun?
And Dr. Calhoun had enough people.
I don't know.
He probably was over here, too.
Trying to think of who.
I mean, really, and truly, in our bailiwick, I would see English and history faculty more than I would see any administrators.
Because administrators could have their gophers come over here and get what they needed.
And that would save them hours of time.
This also, I'm digressing.
Nobody hated to have the card catalog go as much as Milton Nance.
Now, everybody has Milton Nance stories.
I know that.
Please share some, though.
But he, I mean, every time he would come in and that online catalog was on, he refused to learn how to use it.
Absolutely refused.
And he would fuss, and he would, oh, he was just, he was a most unhappy gentleman.
And I look back, you know, and every time he'd start, well, the staff would say, well, Dr. Nance is here, so I would have to go out and sort of try to pacify this because, you know, it isn't fair to take this out on.
on your staff, particularly since it was ongoing.
It was just a constant badgering.
Who were some of the favorite library user?
Well, of course, you're high on that list, and Garland Bayless is one, and Victor Treat.
You're all of our favorites.
Another favorite, and of course, someone that I like
in the faculty, and Betty, Betty was wonderful to all of us.
She was, and we really wanted to help her and to do anything that she wanted to do.
She was really, really great.
And somebody I helped a lot was Sarah Alpern.
with some of her research.
And you were just really wanting to help.
It's so easy to help people when they're kind and considerate.
It's when they're difficult.
And I don't say that all the difficult people are in science and technology.
The people I dealt with in the liberal arts and in the social sciences were not all, but for the most part were much more gracious to deal with than some of the people on the other side.
So, you know, that's just my personal opinion.
Do you remember any goofy things that a faculty member wanted you all to get for them or find for them?
I don't think so that I did, but I bet someone like, I remember,
I remember actually, we're going to get around to some of these people, but I don't remember anything in our particular area that anybody wanted that we couldn't actually find.
I don't remember any goofy things that happened like that.
But I'm sure there might have been.
And people working at nights, sometimes you get interesting things happen in the library.
You might not have even been here.
You might have been away then.
But we had a spell of streaking in the library.
That mean these nude people would come roaring through, and everybody would get all upset.
We had one Vietnam veteran.
You probably heard this story.
This is one of the most famous stories of all.
He resented anybody in the library or anybody anywhere that who was wearing
sandals so this gentleman had a pair of pliers and was running around pinching toes so we called him the toe biter and you know he obviously had had some emotional problems and he was you know not long not long for the university but it was you know everybody made a big big to do about this was this both male and female toes
I think them, but just male toes as far as I remember.
It was just male toes.
The Streakers, were they co-educational?
I would guess that they probably were.
Mostly male-o.
But you know, if people were over here sleeping in the library, no telling what was going on over here.
Did you all, on occasion, you did find some sleepers in the morning when you came in?
Oh, yes.
The security staff would find them and try to get them out.
I don't think they always got them out.
I mean, there are plenty of places where people could easily find them.
I don't know if that's true now.
It looks to me like you have pretty well, it's open, it's a lot more open and there aren't any nooks and crannies here and there.
Do you remember any obvious physical damage that anybody did?
I did hear that there was some, you know, and there were still the people who would take a book and, you know, razors.
Those people will always be around and about.
And you just, you would just have, you would just get a microfilm.
But no piles of books on the floor?
No, I don't remember anything like that.
They would have been picked up pretty fast anyway by the shelvers.
If they had found them, they would just think that some student was doing something.
Were there student employees in your earliest days?
Yeah, I think we've always had student employees.
How important are they?
Well, they're very important.
They're like the classified staff.
The whole thing just depends on a whole lot of interacting individuals of all ages doing their job.
Is that, looking back on it, is that employment for those students, is that good for them perhaps professionally in the future?
I think that some of our students went on to, someone, I think several people have established student scholarships here.
And I think one was, I'm trying to remember, oh he's the nicest man, he was our doorman.
And his wife worked for Cash and Kane.
And he gave considerable, he gave his annuity, he bequeathed his annuity for student scholarships.
And that was a wonderful thing for him to do.
And I think several of them, I think Pixie, the girl who's now in charge of all the computers, I think she was our student assistant.
I'm trying to think of some of the other, I don't know of anybody that's still here who would have been a student assistant, but she comes to mind.
And she was working for an engineering firm.
She at least had a, she may have a PhD in engineering for all I know.
But then she was working for a firm and then decided that she wanted to come back.
And then she took her library degree and came back here and has worked her way up into what she's doing.
When you first got here, most of the students would have been male.
That's right.
And then gradually it became .
.
Yes, gradually.
What was the difference in having an almost entirely male student body using the library and a group of male and female?
Well, I think you're more conscious of just the fact that you've got all, you know, both male and female in here.
I don't think when we were, when we first started with almost completely male group that we, they were in here to do, you know, they were in here to study.
They were in here to get, do their research.
When the women came in, I think, you know, as all parents know, what's going on here with all of the... That's just natural for somebody to think about it.
But anyway, I don't think actually a lot of...
It may be, too, that when the women came in, this might have been a place for them to kind of relax.